ruby/labs/sinatra/2-blog-api/README.md, before:

# Sinatra Lab 2: Blog API with Database

A RESTful blog API demonstrating advanced Sinatra concepts with PostgreSQL, JWT authentication, and API design best practices.

## 🎯 Learning Objectives

This lab demonstrates:
- **RESTful API Design**: Building a JSON API following REST principles
- **Database Integration**: PostgreSQL with ActiveRecord ORM
- **Authentication**: JWT (JSON Web Tokens) for stateless auth
- **API Versioning**: Proper API versioning strategy (v1)
- **Error Handling**: Standardized error responses
- **Validation**: Model validations and error messages
- **Associations**: Complex model relationships (users, posts, comments, tags)
- **Pagination**: Efficient data pagination for large datasets
- **JSON Serialization**: Custom JSON responses

## 📋 Project Structure

```
2-blog-api/
├── README.md (this file)
├── app.rb (main Sinatra API application)
├── config/
│   └── database.rb (database configuration)
├── lib/
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── user.rb (user model with authentication)
│   │   ├── post.rb (blog post model)
│   │   ├── comment.rb (comment model)
│   │   └── tag.rb (tag model)
│   ├── auth.rb (JWT authentication helpers)
│   └── serializers.rb (JSON serialization)
└── db/
    └── seeds.rb (sample data for testing)
```

## 🚀 Running the Lab

### Option 1: Progressive Building (Recommended)

Follow the step-by-step guide to build the API incrementally:

👉 **[Follow the Progressive Steps Guide →](STEPS.md)**

This guide breaks the lab into 9 manageable steps:
1. Basic API Setup
2. Add Database with ActiveRecord
3. User Model with Authentication
4. JWT Authentication
5. Post Model and CRUD
6. Comments System
7. Tagging System
8. Pagination
9. Error Handling

### Option 2: Run Complete Application

```bash
# Install dependencies
gem install sinatra activerecord pg jwt bcrypt

# Set up PostgreSQL database
createdb blog_api_dev

# Run migrations (will be created automatically on first run)
# Or use the provided setup script

# Run the application
cd ruby/labs/sinatra/2-blog-api
ruby app.rb

# API will be available at http://localhost:4567
```

## 🎓 Features Implemented

### 1. User Authentication (JWT)
- User registration with email validation
- Login with password verification (BCrypt)
- JWT token generation and verification
- Protected routes requiring authentication

### 2. Blog Posts (CRUD)
- Create posts (authenticated users only)
- Read posts (public access)
- Update posts (author only)
- Delete posts (author only)
- Search and filter posts
- Pagination support

### 3. Comments System
- Add comments to posts
- Nested comment structure
- Edit/delete own comments
- Moderation capabilities

### 4. Tagging System
- Add tags to posts
- Query posts by tag
- Popular tags endpoint
- Tag statistics

### 5. API Features
- JSON responses with proper HTTP status codes
- Error handling with detailed messages
- Request validation
- Rate limiting (concept)
- API versioning (/api/v1)

## 🔍 API Endpoints

### Authentication
```
POST   /api/v1/auth/register    # Register new user
POST   /api/v1/auth/login       # Login and get JWT token
GET    /api/v1/auth/me          # Get current user info
```

### Posts
```
GET    /api/v1/posts            # List all posts (paginated)
GET    /api/v1/posts/:id        # Get single post
POST   /api/v1/posts            # Create post (auth required)
PUT    /api/v1/posts/:id        # Update post (auth required)
DELETE /api/v1/posts/:id        # Delete post (auth required)
GET    /api/v1/posts/:id/comments  # Get post comments
```

### Comments
```
POST   /api/v1/posts/:id/comments    # Add comment (auth required)
PUT    /api/v1/comments/:id          # Update comment (auth required)
DELETE /api/v1/comments/:id          # Delete comment (auth required)
```

### Tags
```
GET    /api/v1/tags             # List all tags
GET    /api/v1/tags/:id/posts   # Get posts with tag
```

### Users
```
GET    /api/v1/users/:id        # Get user profile
GET    /api/v1/users/:id/posts  # Get user's posts
```

## 📝 Example Usage

### Register a User
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:4567/api/v1/auth/register \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "email": "user@example.com",
    "password": "securepass",
    "name": "John Doe"
  }'
```

### Login
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:4567/api/v1/auth/login \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "email": "user@example.com",
    "password": "securepass"
  }'

# Response includes JWT token:
# {"token": "eyJhbGc...", "user": {...}}
```

### Create a Post (with JWT)
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:4567/api/v1/posts \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_JWT_TOKEN" \
  -d '{
    "title": "My First Post",
    "content": "This is the content...",
    "tags": ["ruby", "sinatra"]
  }'
```

### Get All Posts
```bash
curl http://localhost:4567/api/v1/posts?page=1&per_page=10
```

## 🐍 For Python Developers

This Sinatra API compares to these Python frameworks:

### Flask-RESTful Equivalent
```python
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request
from flask_restful import Resource, Api
from flask_jwt_extended import JWTManager, create_access_token, jwt_required

app = Flask(__name__)
api = Api(app)
jwt = JWTManager(app)

class PostList(Resource):
    def get(self):
        posts = Post.query.all()
        return jsonify([post.serialize() for post in posts])

    @jwt_required()
    def post(self):
        data = request.get_json()
        post = Post(title=data['title'], content=data['content'])
        db.session.add(post)
        db.session.commit()
        return post.serialize(), 201

api.add_resource(PostList, '/api/v1/posts')
```

### FastAPI Equivalent
```python
from fastapi import FastAPI, Depends, HTTPException, status
from fastapi.security import HTTPBearer
from pydantic import BaseModel
from typing import List

app = FastAPI()
security = HTTPBearer()

class PostCreate(BaseModel):
    title: str
    content: str
    tags: List[str] = []

@app.post("/api/v1/posts", response_model=Post)
async def create_post(
    post: PostCreate,
    token: str = Depends(security)
):
    user = verify_token(token)
    return Post.create(**post.dict(), user_id=user.id)

@app.get("/api/v1/posts", response_model=List[Post])
async def list_posts(page: int = 1, per_page: int = 10):
    return Post.query.paginate(page, per_page)
```

### Django REST Framework Equivalent
```python
from rest_framework import viewsets, permissions
from rest_framework.decorators import action
from rest_framework.response import Response

class PostViewSet(viewsets.ModelViewSet):
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer
    permission_classes = [permissions.IsAuthenticatedOrReadOnly]

    def perform_create(self, serializer):
        serializer.save(user=self.request.user)

    @action(detail=True, methods=['get'])
    def comments(self, request, pk=None):
        post = self.get_object()
        comments = post.comments.all()
        serializer = CommentSerializer(comments, many=True)
        return Response(serializer.data)
```

### Key Differences
- **Sinatra**: Minimalist, explicit routing, manual serialization
- **Flask-RESTful**: Similar simplicity with RESTful conventions
- **FastAPI**: Modern, async, automatic validation with Pydantic
- **Django REST Framework**: Full-featured, includes serializers, viewsets

## 📊 Database Schema

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  email VARCHAR(255) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
  password_digest VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  updated_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

CREATE TABLE posts (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  content TEXT NOT NULL,
  published BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
  user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  updated_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

CREATE TABLE comments (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  content TEXT NOT NULL,
  post_id INTEGER REFERENCES posts(id),
  user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

CREATE TABLE tags (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE post_tags (
  post_id INTEGER REFERENCES posts(id),
  tag_id INTEGER REFERENCES tags(id),
  PRIMARY KEY (post_id, tag_id)
);
```

## 🎯 Challenges

Try extending the API with:

1. **Likes System**: Add likes/favorites for posts and comments
2. **Follow System**: Users can follow other users
3. **Media Upload**: Support for image uploads with posts
4. **Full-Text Search**: Implement search with PostgreSQL full-text search
5. **Caching**: Add Redis caching for popular posts
6. **WebSockets**: Real-time notifications for comments
7. **Rate Limiting**: Implement proper rate limiting
8. **API Documentation**: Auto-generate OpenAPI/Swagger docs
9. **Soft Deletes**: Implement soft delete for posts/comments
10. **Activity Feed**: User activity stream

## 📚 Concepts Covered

After completing this lab, you'll understand:

- **RESTful API Design**: Following REST principles and conventions
- **JWT Authentication**: Stateless authentication with tokens
- **ActiveRecord ORM**: Complex associations and queries
- **JSON APIs**: Serialization and standardized responses
- **Error Handling**: Proper HTTP status codes and error messages
- **Database Migrations**: Schema management
- **Security**: Password hashing, token validation
- **Pagination**: Efficient data loading for large datasets
- **API Versioning**: Managing API changes over time

## 🔧 Technical Details

### Dependencies
- **sinatra**: Web framework (~> 3.0)
- **activerecord**: ORM for database access (~> 7.0)
- **pg**: PostgreSQL driver (~> 1.5)
- **jwt**: JSON Web Token implementation (~> 2.7)
- **bcrypt**: Password hashing (~> 3.1)

### Database
- PostgreSQL for production-ready features
- Can use SQLite for development if needed

### Security
- BCrypt password hashing
- JWT with expiration
- Authorization checks on routes
- SQL injection protection via ORM

---

Ready to build a blog API? Run `ruby app.rb` and start making API calls!

Commit message:

fixed issues with labs structure, improved make commands, and updated lab documentation

ruby/labs/sinatra/2-blog-api/README.md, after:

# Sinatra Lab 2: Blog API with Database

A RESTful blog API demonstrating advanced Sinatra concepts with PostgreSQL, JWT authentication, and API design best practices.

## 🎯 Learning Objectives

This lab demonstrates:
- **RESTful API Design**: Building a JSON API following REST principles
- **Database Integration**: PostgreSQL with ActiveRecord ORM
- **Authentication**: JWT (JSON Web Tokens) for stateless auth
- **API Versioning**: Proper API versioning strategy (v1)
- **Error Handling**: Standardized error responses
- **Validation**: Model validations and error messages
- **Associations**: Complex model relationships (users, posts, comments, tags)
- **Pagination**: Efficient data pagination for large datasets
- **JSON Serialization**: Custom JSON responses

## 📋 Project Structure

```
2-blog-api/
├── README.md (this file)
├── app.rb (main Sinatra API application)
├── config/
│   └── database.rb (database configuration)
├── lib/
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── user.rb (user model with authentication)
│   │   ├── post.rb (blog post model)
│   │   ├── comment.rb (comment model)
│   │   └── tag.rb (tag model)
│   ├── auth.rb (JWT authentication helpers)
│   └── serializers.rb (JSON serialization)
└── db/
    └── seeds.rb (sample data for testing)
```

## 🚀 Running the Lab

### Step-by-Step Guide (Recommended)

Start from scratch and build the API incrementally through 9 steps:

👉 **[Start with Step 1 →](steps/1/README.md)**

Each step builds on the previous one:
1. Basic API Setup (20 min)
2. Add Database with ActiveRecord (25 min)
3. User Model with Authentication (30 min)
4. JWT Authentication (35 min)
5. Post Model and CRUD (30 min)
6. Comments System (25 min)
7. Tagging System (20 min)
8. Pagination (15 min)
9. Error Handling (15 min)

**Total Time**: ~3-4 hours

### Quick Start with Make

```bash
make sinatra-lab NUM=2
```

This command:
- Starts PostgreSQL and the application in Docker
- Opens the API at http://localhost:4567
- Follow [Step 1](steps/1/README.md) to begin building

### Run Complete Solution

To see the finished API:

👉 **[View Solution Guide →](solution/README.md)**

## 🎓 Features Implemented

### 1. User Authentication (JWT)
- User registration with email validation
- Login with password verification (BCrypt)
- JWT token generation and verification
- Protected routes requiring authentication

### 2. Blog Posts (CRUD)
- Create posts (authenticated users only)
- Read posts (public access)
- Update posts (author only)
- Delete posts (author only)
- Search and filter posts
- Pagination support

### 3. Comments System
- Add comments to posts
- Nested comment structure
- Edit/delete own comments
- Moderation capabilities

### 4. Tagging System
- Add tags to posts
- Query posts by tag
- Popular tags endpoint
- Tag statistics

### 5. API Features
- JSON responses with proper HTTP status codes
- Error handling with detailed messages
- Request validation
- Rate limiting (concept)
- API versioning (/api/v1)

## 🔍 API Endpoints

### Authentication
```
POST   /api/v1/auth/register    # Register new user
POST   /api/v1/auth/login       # Login and get JWT token
GET    /api/v1/auth/me          # Get current user info
```

### Posts
```
GET    /api/v1/posts            # List all posts (paginated)
GET    /api/v1/posts/:id        # Get single post
POST   /api/v1/posts            # Create post (auth required)
PUT    /api/v1/posts/:id        # Update post (auth required)
DELETE /api/v1/posts/:id        # Delete post (auth required)
GET    /api/v1/posts/:id/comments  # Get post comments
```

### Comments
```
POST   /api/v1/posts/:id/comments    # Add comment (auth required)
PUT    /api/v1/comments/:id          # Update comment (auth required)
DELETE /api/v1/comments/:id          # Delete comment (auth required)
```

### Tags
```
GET    /api/v1/tags             # List all tags
GET    /api/v1/tags/:id/posts   # Get posts with tag
```

### Users
```
GET    /api/v1/users/:id        # Get user profile
GET    /api/v1/users/:id/posts  # Get user's posts
```

## 📝 Example Usage

### Register a User
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:4567/api/v1/auth/register \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "email": "user@example.com",
    "password": "securepass",
    "name": "John Doe"
  }'
```

### Login
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:4567/api/v1/auth/login \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "email": "user@example.com",
    "password": "securepass"
  }'

# Response includes JWT token:
# {"token": "eyJhbGc...", "user": {...}}
```

### Create a Post (with JWT)
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:4567/api/v1/posts \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_JWT_TOKEN" \
  -d '{
    "title": "My First Post",
    "content": "This is the content...",
    "tags": ["ruby", "sinatra"]
  }'
```

### Get All Posts
```bash
curl http://localhost:4567/api/v1/posts?page=1&per_page=10
```

## 🐍 For Python Developers

This Sinatra API compares to these Python frameworks:

### Flask-RESTful Equivalent
```python
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request
from flask_restful import Resource, Api
from flask_jwt_extended import JWTManager, create_access_token, jwt_required

app = Flask(__name__)
api = Api(app)
jwt = JWTManager(app)

class PostList(Resource):
    def get(self):
        posts = Post.query.all()
        return jsonify([post.serialize() for post in posts])

    @jwt_required()
    def post(self):
        data = request.get_json()
        post = Post(title=data['title'], content=data['content'])
        db.session.add(post)
        db.session.commit()
        return post.serialize(), 201

api.add_resource(PostList, '/api/v1/posts')
```

### FastAPI Equivalent
```python
from fastapi import FastAPI, Depends, HTTPException, status
from fastapi.security import HTTPBearer
from pydantic import BaseModel
from typing import List

app = FastAPI()
security = HTTPBearer()

class PostCreate(BaseModel):
    title: str
    content: str
    tags: List[str] = []

@app.post("/api/v1/posts", response_model=Post)
async def create_post(
    post: PostCreate,
    token: str = Depends(security)
):
    user = verify_token(token)
    return Post.create(**post.dict(), user_id=user.id)

@app.get("/api/v1/posts", response_model=List[Post])
async def list_posts(page: int = 1, per_page: int = 10):
    return Post.query.paginate(page, per_page)
```

### Django REST Framework Equivalent
```python
from rest_framework import viewsets, permissions
from rest_framework.decorators import action
from rest_framework.response import Response

class PostViewSet(viewsets.ModelViewSet):
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer
    permission_classes = [permissions.IsAuthenticatedOrReadOnly]

    def perform_create(self, serializer):
        serializer.save(user=self.request.user)

    @action(detail=True, methods=['get'])
    def comments(self, request, pk=None):
        post = self.get_object()
        comments = post.comments.all()
        serializer = CommentSerializer(comments, many=True)
        return Response(serializer.data)
```

### Key Differences
- **Sinatra**: Minimalist, explicit routing, manual serialization
- **Flask-RESTful**: Similar simplicity with RESTful conventions
- **FastAPI**: Modern, async, automatic validation with Pydantic
- **Django REST Framework**: Full-featured, includes serializers, viewsets

## 📊 Database Schema

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  email VARCHAR(255) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
  password_digest VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  updated_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

CREATE TABLE posts (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  content TEXT NOT NULL,
  published BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
  user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  updated_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

CREATE TABLE comments (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  content TEXT NOT NULL,
  post_id INTEGER REFERENCES posts(id),
  user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);

CREATE TABLE tags (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE post_tags (
  post_id INTEGER REFERENCES posts(id),
  tag_id INTEGER REFERENCES tags(id),
  PRIMARY KEY (post_id, tag_id)
);
```

## 🎯 Challenges

Try extending the API with:

1. **Likes System**: Add likes/favorites for posts and comments
2. **Follow System**: Users can follow other users
3. **Media Upload**: Support for image uploads with posts
4. **Full-Text Search**: Implement search with PostgreSQL full-text search
5. **Caching**: Add Redis caching for popular posts
6. **WebSockets**: Real-time notifications for comments
7. **Rate Limiting**: Implement proper rate limiting
8. **API Documentation**: Auto-generate OpenAPI/Swagger docs
9. **Soft Deletes**: Implement soft delete for posts/comments
10. **Activity Feed**: User activity stream

## 📚 Concepts Covered

After completing this lab, you'll understand:

- **RESTful API Design**: Following REST principles and conventions
- **JWT Authentication**: Stateless authentication with tokens
- **ActiveRecord ORM**: Complex associations and queries
- **JSON APIs**: Serialization and standardized responses
- **Error Handling**: Proper HTTP status codes and error messages
- **Database Migrations**: Schema management
- **Security**: Password hashing, token validation
- **Pagination**: Efficient data loading for large datasets
- **API Versioning**: Managing API changes over time

## 🔧 Technical Details

### Dependencies
- **sinatra**: Web framework (~> 3.0)
- **activerecord**: ORM for database access (~> 7.0)
- **pg**: PostgreSQL driver (~> 1.5)
- **jwt**: JSON Web Token implementation (~> 2.7)
- **bcrypt**: Password hashing (~> 3.1)

### Database
- PostgreSQL for production-ready features
- Can use SQLite for development if needed

### Security
- BCrypt password hashing
- JWT with expiration
- Authorization checks on routes
- SQL injection protection via ORM

---

Ready to build a blog API? Run `ruby app.rb` and start making API calls!
